SRPP - Simple Restful PDMP Profile
==================================

Background
----------

Two United States federal government agencies (SAMHSA (the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration) and ONC (the Office
of the National Coordinator for Health IT)) implemented a set of pilot
tests in 2012.  These pilots were intended to demonstrate the value of
providing PDMP (Prescription Drug Monitoring Program) data to health
care providers via the systems that they used on a day-to-day basis
such as EMR's and HIE's.  The results were clear: healthcare providers
used PDMP data more effectively when they didn't have to "alt-tab" to
a web browser and login to a PDMP portal.

One of the key lessons learned from the pilot tests was that
integrating to PDMP systems was very difficult.  In most states, the
PDMP was a "walled garden" with no API for system integration, only an
HTML portal for end-user access.  We were able in some cases to work
around this problem by connecting to an interstate PDMP data sharing
system (such as PMPi) but had to abandon some pilot tests because we
couldn't integrate with the local PDMP.

Based on this experience, ONC and SMAHSA developed a testbed to
demonstrate an integration between a PDMP and an EMR.  This document
describes the protocol used for that demonstration.  It's based on
existing healthcare and internet standard protocols.

Introduction
------------

The Simple Restful PDMP Profile describes an interface for health IT
systems (e.g., EMR, EHR, HIE) to query PDMP systems for patient
controlled substance history reports.  It implements two use cases:
patient query (i.e., search), and report retrieval.  Patient query is
implemented using the [OpenSearch
Protocol](http://www.opensearch.org/), and report retrieval is
implemented using the [hData REST Binding for
RLUS](http://www.projecthdata.org/).  Both protocols are very
flexible, so this document describes the design constraints that
should be followed to ensure interoperability.

Patient Query
-------------

SRPP patient queries use the [OpenSearch
Protocol](http://www.opensearch.org/). The OpenSearch web site
describes OpenSearch as

> a collection of simple formats for the sharing of search results.

OpenSearch consists of a "description document" that describes how to
query a search service, and a set of "response elements" that describe
how to format search results.

SRPP server implementations must provide an [Autodiscovery
link](http://www.opensearch.org/Specifications/OpenSearch/1.1#Autodiscovery)
to their OpenSearch description document, in either HTML or RSS form.
HTML is preferred, in the server's home page (i.e., the page with a
path of "/").  Clients should implement autodiscovery, but should also
allow the server's description document URI to be entered manually.

### Description Document

### Search Terms

### Atom Results

Document Retrieval
------------------

Security
--------

Example
-------

### Description Document

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <OpenSearchDescription xmlns="http://a9.com/-/spec/opensearch/1.1/" xmlns:pdmp="http://pdmp.mitre.org/opensearchextensions/1.0/">
      <ShortName>PDMP Patient Search</ShortName>
      <LongName>PDMP Patient Search</LongName>
      <Description>Search the PDMP for patients</Description>
      <Tags>pdmp patient</Tags>
      <Url type="application/opensearchdescription+xml" method="get" rel="self" template="http://localhost:3000/people/opensearch"/>
      <Url type="application/atom+xml" method="get" rel="results" template="http://localhost:3000/people/?utf8=✓&amp;search={searchTerms}"/>
      <Url type="text/html" method="get" template="http://localhost:3000/people/?utf8=✓&amp;search={searchTerms}"/>
      <Query role="example" pdmp:ln="smith" pdmp:fn="john" pdmp:location="boston" pdmp:gen="male" title="Sample search"/>
      <Developer>MITRE Corporation</Developer>
      <SyndicationRight>limited</SyndicationRight>
      <AdultContent>false</AdultContent>
      <Language>*</Language>
      <OutputEncoding>UTF-8</OutputEncoding>
      <InputEncoding>UTF-8</InputEncoding>
    </OpenSearchDescription>
